Read the text below then answer the questions.

Six sentences have been removed from the text. Choose from the sentences (A – G) the one which fits each gap (12 – 17). There is one extra sentence which you do not need to use.

The tawny frogmouth: the owl that isn't

Australia is a land of iconic birds. Kookaburra, emu, budgie, sulphur-crested cockatoo, wedge-tailed eagle, galah – you'd never mistake one of those species for any of the others. One of our birds, though, is often confused with another type. The tawny frogmouth, haunter of midnight letterboxes, maker of weird noises in the dark, possessor of a penetrating yellow-eyed stare, is not an owl.

12 ............ . Fluffy feathers? Check. Front-facing giant eyes? Check. Hooked, raptor-like beak mostly hidden by tufts and whiskery bits? Check. Nocturnal, spooky, silent-flying and maker of hooty-type noises? All check.

In fact, the frogmouth is a type of nightjar. 13 ............ . However, it's not that straightforward. Confusingly, "strigoides", the scientific name for the species, means "owl-form" and they will eat baby mice if offered them by wildlife carers. But even so, a frogmouth is not an owl.

During the day, frogmouths adopt a distinctively stretched and thin posture. With eyes closed or opened to the merest slit, they are impressively well-camouflaged against almost any tree. 14 ............ . You just never see them. You'll probably hear them, though, making a deep "oom-oom-oom" in the late evening. Manage to get a torch on one, and the bird will just stare back at you, not moving, daring you to make the first move.

Since frogmouths live in a wide range of Australian habitats, as a species they need to be able to handle temperatures from as low as eight degrees all the way up to 40+. 15 ............ . When it comes to extreme cold, frogmouths can enter a state known as "torpor". It's not quite hibernation – it only lasts for a few hours at a time rather than weeks – but it has the same drop in metabolic function, slowed heart rate, and conservation of energy. During torpor, a frogmouth's body temperature can drop by up to 10 degrees. 16 ............ .

Meanwhile, the tawny frogmouth's close South American relative, the potoo, has become a sort of running joke on the internet. 17 ............ . Not only do these exaggerated features allow them to spot and scoop up their insect prey in the dark, they have also enabled the potoo to become the star of thousands of memes.


Sentence A. The key difference between these birds and true owls is that frogmouths feed on insects.
Sentence B. In doing so, frogmouths play an important role in their native habitat, particularly in agricultural areas.
Sentence C. That's unusually extensive for a single bird species, so they have special adaptations for fast panting, and use their wide mouths as radiators.
Sentence D. Looking more like a cartoon character than a real animal, it has yellow eyes like ping pong balls and a ridiculously oversized mouth.
Sentence E. For comparison, if this ever happened to you, you would enter severe hypothermia, lose consciousness, and unless rescued by other humans, you would probably be in serious trouble.
Sentence F. Not that we blame anyone for making that mistake.
Sentence G. In any sizeable garden, there are almost certainly frogmouths around.
