Crossing the Stride

Twelve-year-old Mikey spends one summer living beside the river Stride in rural northern England.

A clump of rotted tree root whizzed just past Mikey's head. Out of nowhere it came, as he was sitting on the riverbank, dangling his feet over the edge, throwing stones into the black swirling waters below. Half curious, half panicked, he stayed where he was and waited to see if it would happen again. Away to his left on the other side of the water was a gate which looked like it led down from a path. Mikey kept his gaze fixed on that. This time a clump of mud followed. This one missed him by a long stretch but it confirmed that he was under some sort of attack. It seemed to be coming from behind a large mound of mud and rocks with grass sprouting on top. At least it was just soft stuff coming his way. He knew nobody in this territory some half a mile from home, so he got up, heart pounding in his ears, and started to move away, on the path towards the farmhouse.

'He's running...here, don't you run, stones-boy... we want a word with you!' cried a voice, as two figures emerged, obviously local boys on their summer break from school. They were on the other side of the river, so Mikey was perfectly safe...until he remembered the bridge. 'We'll catch him at the bridge further downstream,' shouted the short, black-haired thrower to the other. Mikey decided running was futile and too stressful, so he stopped in his tracks and turned to face them.

'Sorry, I thought you were The Strider! I'm Mikey,' he blurted out, trying not to sound too nervous. 'I'll wait for you at the bridge.'

The survival strategy, well-honed from school, seemed to be working – certainly it put Mikey's pursuers off their guard. When they met at the bridge, it was the other one, tall, lanky and very upright - just like a stick of celery - who said: 'Ere, I've seed you before, ha'nt I? You're the one what saved that sparrowhawk from the Strider the other evening!'

It was true, Mikey had noticed a sparrowhawk lying flapping near the Stride; he'd picked it up in his leather gloves and taken it back to the farmhouse for Auntie May to tend to. 'Leave him Zak, he's all right...he's an absolute legend!' Celery said to The Mud Thrower.

'You're all right, you are,' said Zak, panting as they stood on Mikey's side of the bridge. 'You just stand and don't run. I'm Zak, and this is Tremble. What are you doing on our patch and how do you know about The Strider?'

Mikey explained that he was here for the summer, as his Mum in London was ill, and he was living with his aunt and uncle in the big farmhouse. And The Strider? Well, everyone hereabouts knew about the Strider story. Some said he was a malevolent water spirit, some that he was the ghost of a walker who'd tried and failed to jump over the river, but all agreed that he lived in the murky, fast-flowing, waters of the Stride and liked nothing better than luring people to their watery doom. Uncle Bob had told Mikey all about him. Mikey learnt that Tremble was so-called because the mere mention of the Strider could evidently make him shake and that Zak was something of a leader figure, not to be trifled with.

Mikey's new friends, as he thought he could probably trust them enough to call them, made him promise to meet them the following afternoon at a point on the Stride footpath known as The Crossing, a place which seemed to be solemnly important to them. When he got there, Mikey soon saw why: the Stride was quite narrow at this point, and attached to an overhanging branch belonging to a large oak tree was a rope with a makeshift wooden seat.

But this time there were two other kids with them. Mikey was introduced to a boy, Rango, whose appearance was dominated by an enormous cowboy hat, and a sparkling-eyed girl called Emily, who looked like she loved nothing more than baiting water spirits. Together they were, he learned, The Striders, and they spent their summer building dens and climbing trees in the wooded lands around the river.

Zak said: 'Because you rescued a hawk from the Strider, we want to make you an honorary member of our club – that's if you want to, of course. If you agree, from now on when you're with us, you're not Mikey anymore.

'Aren't I?' said Mikey.

'No,' said Zak firmly. You're Sparrow. But you have to do one thing first, to earn the name.'

Mikey shrugged his shoulders, as if to say 'why not?'

'You have to swing across the river, touch down with one foot and then swing back and get off...all in one movement. And without falling off or falling over.'

'Or falling in the water?'

'That's the catch,' said Zak. 'They say it's so deep at The Crossing that nobody has ever survived falling in. And I mean ever.'

Tremble grinned a toothy grin and did his best not to shake, Rango mumbled something cowboy-ish from somewhere beneath his hat, and Emily, who Mikey thought could sense his discomfort, said: 'Don't listen to Zak – he's talking mumbo jumbo. It's perfectly easy, Mikey. I'll show you what to do first. I've done it thousands of times. There's a knack to it...when you're sitting on the bit of wood.'

Mikey looked again at The Crossing. At this point, where so many people had – apparently – tried and failed to cross the river by hook or by crook, it was, he estimated, about eight feet across from bank to bank. He fancied that you could get quite a good run-up to the nearside bank, and on either side the bank looked sturdy and not likely to give way under your weight. If he was right...well, eight feet wasn't that far: he'd jumped much further in long jump practice for school sports day.

'Ok, I'll do it!'

Tremble patted him on the back and Emily smiled. 'He's gonna fly like a Sparrow!' said Tremble, and everyone laughed.

'But not the swing,' Mikey said. 'I'll jump the Stride.'


Q1
Mikey is aware that the things thrown at him

A are landing near him by mistake.
B are meant to make him retaliate.
C are coming from two different places.
D are not intended to hurt him.

Q2
After the meeting at the bridge, Zak and Tremble are thinking that Mikey

A is hiding the fact that he belongs to another group.
B has witnessed an incident where a bird got injured.
C deserves their respect for showing courage.
D may be a legendary figure sent to fight The Strider.

Q3
In the paragraph about The Strider, we are told that there is some disagreement over

A what his exact form is.
B where exactly he lives.
C what his intentions are.
D how best to fight against him.

Q4
What does Emily do at The Crossing?

A She tells off Zak.
B She tries to reassure Mikey.
C She boasts about surviving the fall.
D She tries to provoke The Strider into appearing.

Q5
How does Mikey feel about crossing the Stride river?

A concerned about the condition of the rope
B annoyed that this is the only way of joining the club
C confident that he can do it the hard way
D frustrated that the required method is too complicated

Q6
In this text, the writer uses

A humour to make the story seem less menacing.
B poetic language to make the place seem attractive.
C repetition of particular words to make the river seem mysterious.
D changes in perspective so that we see the story through different people's eyes.
