Read the four extracts below on the theme of water.

Which extract...

In which extract does the writer...

talk extensively about a substance that is added to water?	A/B/C/D

mention the cost of water being less than some people realise?	A/B/C/D

describe water in figurative language?	A/B/C/D

talk about people taking water for granted?	A/B/C/D

explain a regulation concerning water?	A/B/C/D

refer to people keeping a record of where water is?	A/B/C/D

refer to water as providing relief for someone?	A/B/C/D

mention how a particular group of people can benefit from being in water?	A/B/C/D


Extract A

Whenever I start a presentation about water management, I ask the audience if they know what the price of a litre of tap water is. Usually the room goes quiet, shoulders shrug and only a few make a guess, usually an overestimation. My next question is about the price of a litre of petrol. Within a split second, I get the right answer from the audience.

Water is indispensable, not only for humans, but for all living things. Yet our relationship with water is out of touch. In developed countries, drinking water is readily available everywhere: from the tap, the supermarket, and the corner shop. Many of us do not realise just how important water really is and what we use it for. Besides drinking water, water is used in production processes. We trade water in reality and virtually, we regulate water, we divert water, we pollute water, we fight over water, we rely on water to cool thermal power plants, and most importantly, water will be the medium through which environmental impacts are felt and experienced.


Extract B

Emma sat on the edge of her father's yacht, her back to the hot noon sunrays and her feet dangling into the warmed summer waters. She kicked lazily at the swelling waves until they fell below her toes again, while toying with the idea of swimming. It would be something to do, a break from the sweltering heat. Her head felt hot, the heat sinking into her black hair as efficiently as tarmac. She slid to her side and dangled her arm down to catch the briny water with her fingertips. This far out the waves had no white crest, no foam spray, instead they rolled in lazy arcs like the back of a giant cobra. She got abruptly to her feet and, without calling out a warning to her dad, she dived right in. The sultry air was immediately replaced with the cool water of the ocean.


Extract C

Aboriginal peoples have long recognised that, in some areas, many species of bird, animal and plant life cannot exist without a constant water source; similarly, they know that following certain species during seasonal movements of animals can lead directly to water. Key features of traditional knowledge about locating and using water include oral instruction, mapping of water sources and setting up markers and identifiers such as scar trees and artwork in the environment. These markers also served as signposts by which Aboriginal peoples understood and recognised the custodianship of the water source and the rights and responsibilities of visitors to these sites. In some areas, artwork and carvings on trees that were thousands of years old pointed the way to water sources that were difficult to find. Over the past two hundred years, however, many of these trees and artworks have been removed as a result of land clearing and farming.


Extract D

Swimming is generally considered to be a healthy leisure activity for both the young and old. It is even often advised as the most appropriate sport for asthmatic children, mainly on the grounds that inhaling moist air is less conducive to triggering exercise-induced asthma. However, for obvious reasons of microbiological safety, the water of public and private swimming pools must be disinfected. The most common procedure for water disinfection consists of chlorination. As with all human and technological intervention, the use of chlorine-based products to disinfect swimming water may lead to a number of unwanted effects, in particular the presence of chlorine-containing compounds in the air. Consequently, chlorination may affect the respiratory health of either those who work as swimming attendants or instructors, or those who use the pools as customers.
