Thinking Skills — Practice Test 3 — Questions 1–10


Q1
Inge and Finn first met on a Tuesday. They met again 8 days later. They then met for the third time 4 days later.

On which day did Inge and Finn meet for the third time?

A Tuesday
B Wednesday
C Saturday
D Sunday


Q2
After school, Cecilia likes to visit her favourite juice stand to buy a drink. The stand sells four types of juice, which are available on different days. Cecilia does not like apple or orange juice, but she will visit the stand as long as she can buy a drink that she likes.

juice       days available
lemon       Monday and Wednesday
orange      Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday
apple       Thursday and Friday
grape       Monday, Tuesday and Friday

On which day will Cecilia not visit the juice stand?

A Tuesday
B Wednesday
C Thursday
D Friday


Q3
Nick wants to learn to speak the Wiradjuri language, but he thinks it will take him a long time. Medika suggests a solution: "You should spend some time in Wagga Wagga. There are plenty of people there who can speak Wiradjuri."

Which one of these statements, if true, best supports Medika's claim?

A Nick can travel to Wagga Wagga fairly easily.
B Learning a language always takes hard work and concentration.
C Medika has learned to speak three different languages.
D Languages are easier to learn if you practise speaking them with other people.


Q4
The wooden puzzle below fits together to make a cube. Pairs of blocks will fit to make one of the three layers which will complete the cube.

[IMAGE: Six 3D isometric block shapes labelled 1–6. Each block is an irregular piece made from unit cubes, shaped so that pairs of blocks can be combined to form a complete rectangular layer of a cube.
- Block 1: An L-shaped piece (like a backwards 'C'), roughly 3 cubes wide × 2 deep with a notch cut from the upper-right area.
- Block 2: A larger stepped piece, roughly an inverted staircase shape, 3 cubes wide × 2 deep with cubes stacked on the left side.
- Block 3: A compact angular piece with cubes arranged in a zigzag pattern.
- Block 4: An L-shaped piece that mirrors block 1's notch orientation.
- Block 5: A stepped piece complementary to block 2.
- Block 6: A compact piece complementary to block 3.]

How are the blocks paired together to make each of the three layers of the cube?

A 1 and 5; 2 and 6; 3 and 4
B 1 and 6; 2 and 5; 3 and 4
C 1 and 4; 2 and 5; 3 and 6
D 1 and 6; 2 and 3; 4 and 5


Q5
Simon is watching a news report which claims that nearly a third of Australians go swimming regularly.

Simon: "That can't be true — I almost never go swimming, and neither do any of my friends."
Which one of the following sentences shows that Simon has made a mistake?

A Simon may prefer other forms of exercise, such as running.
B Swimming may have become more popular in recent years.
C The news report that Simon is watching may be incorrect.
D Simon may live in an area where there are few opportunities to go swimming.


Q6
Staff at a wildlife hospital are building a structure to house sugar gliders. The structure has three levels: one for food, one for a water bowl, and one for a hollow log that a sugar glider can use as a nest.

If the food is on a lower level than the water bowl and the log is higher than the food, which one of the following statements must be true?

A The middle level has the log.
B The lowest level has the food.
C The highest level has the water.
D The middle level has the food.


Q7
John is collecting a set of toy robots based on his favourite television program. The robots come in different colours and John still needs the red and green robots to complete his set. The local shop has an offer where they will sell any of the following packs of three robots for $10.

pack 1    red     blue    yellow
pack 2    red     yellow  pink
pack 3    green   pink    purple
pack 4    blue    orange  pink

John has a friend who has a spare green robot and will swap it for a pink robot.
Which pack should John buy to be able to complete his set?

A pack 1
B pack 2
C pack 3
D pack 4


Q8
A scientist, Melanie, is trying to figure out why the number of fish in a nearby lake has decreased over the past year.

Melanie: "The lake has become more polluted over the past year as well, so it must be the pollution that is causing many fish in the lake to die."
Which one of the following sentences shows that Melanie has made a mistake?

A The number of fish in other lakes might not have decreased over the past year.
B Pollution may also cause health problems in humans.
C The number of plants in the lake might not have decreased over the past year.
D More people may have fished from the lake over the past year.


Q9
Some students are growing flowering plants by different windows in their school and keeping track of when they bloom.
The students put a geranium in the canteen and a guppy plant in the music room.
The wax plant they chose for the school hall bloomed before the guppy plant but after the bromeliad in the library.
The geranium bloomed on the same day as the plant in the school hall.

One of the plants bloomed a day before any of the others. Which one was it?

A the geranium
B the guppy plant
C the wax plant
D the bromeliad


Q10
The 16 shapes in Set 2 shown below should be identical to the shapes shown in Set 1.

[IMAGE: Two 4×4 grids of black geometric shapes side by side, labelled "Set 1" and "Set 2". Each grid contains 16 different shapes including arrows, crescents, zigzags, L-shapes, T-shapes, crosses, and other abstract forms.

Set 1 (reading left to right, top to bottom, row by row):
Row 1: right-pointing arrow, right-pointing chevron (>), right-pointing thick arrow, right-pointing bracket (])
Row 2: backwards C shape, upside-down J, forward J, backwards L
Row 3: downward-pointing pentagon, upward-pointing wide V, L-shape, backward L-shape
Row 4: cross/plus, right-pointing arrow (thin), capital L, right-angle (like a check mark)

Set 2 (reading left to right, top to bottom, row by row):
Row 1: upward cross/dagger, H-shape, right-pointing bracket with top, downward hook
Row 2: right-pointing thick arrow, right-pointing chevron (>), right-pointing thick arrow, cross/plus
Row 3: irregular shape, right-pointing bracket (]), left-pointing thick arrow, backwards C
Row 4: upward-pointing wide V, L-shape, downward-pointing pentagon, right-angle

Some shapes in Set 2 appear to be rotated, reflected, or slightly different from Set 1 shapes.]

How many of the shapes in Set 2 are not identical to a shape in Set 1?

A 2
B 3
C 4
D 5
