Thinking Skills — Practice Test 2 — Questions 11–20


Q11
Michael says: "I don't like this book I've been told to read. I think students should be free to choose what books they study at school."
Which one of these statements, if true, best supports Michael's claim?

A Students are allowed to choose what they study in some other subjects.
B Students often want to read books that have been made into films.
C Other students in the class also disliked the book they were told to read.
D Students learn more when they enjoy what they read.


Q12
Four boys are riding their bicycles and have a race to see who can go fastest. Marcel's bicycle is blue and Ralph's is purple. The boy on the red bicycle, Barry, finishes the race ahead of Ralph, but behind Will on his green bicycle. Marcel is level with the boy on the purple bicycle.

Which colour bicycle is the winner?

A green
B blue
C purple
D red


Q13
The lights in four rooms of my house automatically switch on and off during day and night, when I am away from home, so that it always looks like there is someone at home.

The diagram below shows when lights are on or off for each room.

[IMAGE: A horizontal timeline from midnight (left) to midnight (right), with markers at 6 am, midday, and 6 pm. Four rows show light schedules for each room. Black = light on, white = light off.

bedroom:  ON from ~9 pm to ~7 am (continuous through midnight)
hall:     ON from ~5 pm to ~3 am (continuous through midnight)
kitchen:  ON from ~7 am to ~1 pm
bathroom: ON from ~3 pm to ~9 pm
]

What is the longest continuous period of time that more than 1 light is on in my home?

A 3 hours
B 4 hours
C 5 hours
D 6 hours


Q14
Ms Chen's class will be allowed to watch a movie on the last day of term. There are two classrooms available and two televisions, so the class can be split into two, and watch two different movies, if needed.
Ms Chen does a survey of the class, asking them what they would like to watch. She notices that most of the girls in the class want to watch Harry Potter, and most of the boys want to watch Star Wars.

Ms Chen: "There are the same number of boys and girls in the class. So I should put the girls in one classroom and show them Harry Potter, and put the boys in the other classroom to watch Star Wars."
Which one of the following sentences shows the mistake Ms Chen has made?

A Harry Potter and Star Wars may be different lengths.
B There may be some boys who would prefer Harry Potter, and some girls who would prefer Star Wars.
C Some of the boys might only have chosen Star Wars because their friends did.
D Different numbers of boys and girls might miss the last day of term.


Q15
A secret agent uses a code to send messages. It involves shifting each letter of the alphabet forwards or backwards two letters, so for example the letter 'C' could be represented by either 'A' or 'E'. There are no spaces between words in this code.
You receive the following message from the secret agent:

YFCPBKFVFGWCTPKXG?

Which of the following could be the intended message?

A WHERE ARE YOU HIDING?
B WHO READ THE MESSAGE?
C WHEN DID THEY ARRIVE?
D WHAT DID HE DISCOVER?


Q16
I have recently tiled the wall of my bathroom using a set of identical tiles. I have laid the tiles so that the black sections on one tile do not join along the edge of the black sections on another tile.

[IMAGE: A large wall grid (approximately 8 tiles wide × 6 tiles tall) showing identical square tiles arranged in a pattern. Each tile is a small grid divided into black and white sections in an asymmetric pattern. The tiles are placed in alternating orientations to ensure black sections of adjacent tiles do not share an edge. One tile position in the bottom-right area is empty.

Below the wall, four options A–D show the same tile in four different orientations (rotated 0°, 90°, 180°, 270°). Only one orientation will fit the empty position without black sections touching black sections of the neighbouring tiles.]

I have one tile left to put in place.
Which way up will the last tile be placed?

A Option A
B Option B
C Option C
D Option D


Q17
Patricia's friend Aditya recently won a gold medal for the 200 metre freestyle. He trains for six hours per day, six days a week.

Patricia: "I'm going to start a new programme, swimming for six hours a day, six days a week. Then I'll get a gold medal too!"
Which one of the following sentences shows the mistake Patricia has made?

A Some gold medallists may train far less than Aditya.
B Patricia's training programme alone may not guarantee her a gold medal.
C The training programme may prevent Patricia from doing other things she likes.
D Patricia may not be able to afford the cost of the training programme.


Q18
An actor came to visit a local school. She gave the principal this advice: "It is important for children to be given the chance to perform in a school play or concert."
Which one of these statements, if true, best supports the actor's claim?

A The actor has given similar advice at many other schools.
B Children spend a lot of time playing sports and other games.
C Many people enjoy watching plays or listening to concerts.
D Performing in front of other people helps to build confidence.


Q19
A dentists' surgery opens at 8:00 am and closes at 5:00 pm each day. Each appointment is 20 minutes and every dentist has a 60-minute lunch break but no other breaks.
Three dentists work in the surgery.
What is the maximum number of appointments that can be made in the surgery in a day?

A 63
B 72
C 81
D 90


Q20
There are six lunch boxes lined up on a shelf and each is a different colour: blue, green, orange, purple, red and yellow. There is one box between the green box and the orange box. The purple box's only neighbour is blue, and there are three boxes between the red box and the blue box.
What colour lunch boxes are at each end of the line?

A orange and blue
B red and purple
C green and yellow
D purple and orange
