Read the text below. Six sentences have been removed from this text so that there are six gaps.


Drumming Cockatoos

Whales and songbirds produce sounds resembling human music, and chimpanzees and crows use tools. But only one nonhuman animal is known to combine these two skills. According to new research, palm cockatoos1 from northern Australia modify sticks and seed pods and use them to drum regular rhythms on tree branches. In most cases, males drop beats in the presence of females, suggesting they perform to show off to mates. The birds even have their own signature sequences, not unlike human musicians.


This example is the closest we have so far to musical instrument use in humans, said Robert Heinsohn, a professor of evolutionary and conservation biology at the Australian National University. A palm cockatoo drumming performance starts with instrument fashioning. (A) ............ . Often, as a female is watching, a male will ostentatiously break a hefty stick off a tree and trim it to about the length of a pencil.


Holding the stick, or occasionally a hard seedpod, with his left foot (parrots are typically left-footed), the male taps a beat on his tree perch. (B) ............ . Spreading his wings, he pirouettes and bobs his head deeply, like an expressive pianist, uncovering his red cheek patches — the only swaths of color on his otherwise black body.


Over seven years, Dr. Heinsohn and his collaborators collected audio and video recordings of 18 male palm cockatoos exhibiting such behaviors in Australia’s Cape York Peninsula. (C) ............ . Though palm cockatoos also live in Papua New Guinea and Indonesia, they have been observed drumming only in Cape York Peninsula, which suggests the habit is cultural. ‘Presumably some bright spark of a male stumbled across this behavior, females found it pleasing and it took off in the population’, Dr. Heinsohn said.


(D) ............ . Trekking through the dense rain forest, they painstakingly searched for palm cockatoos hidden away in hollow eucalyptus trees. Analyzing 131 drumming sequences, the scientists found that the birds produced regular, predictable rhythms, rather than random thumps. (E) ............ . One that the researchers named Ringo Starr liked to start with a rapid flourish, then settle into a consistent beat, occasionally going on for as long as 14 minutes. Nearly 70 percent of the time, males drummed with a female present. Palm cockatoos are mostly monogamous, but males have to keep proving themselves to choosy females. On average, palm cockatoo pairs successfully fledge a chick only once every decade, so the stakes are high.


The researchers don’t yet know whether females prefer certain rhythms over others. But if a male is delivering an effective performance, the female comes over and mirrors his movements. (F) ............ .


The findings make Dr. Heinsohn wonder whether human rhythm also originated as a courtship display. Maybe that’s how it got started, he speculates, and then later evolved into the love of humans for group-based dancing and music. 

 

1 The palm cockatoo occurs across the country of many different Indigenous groups on Cape York Peninsula. On the east of the cape the species is revered as a ‘spirit bird’ by members of the Uutaalnganu, Kanthanampu, and Kuuku Ya’u language groups in the Lockhart River region, many of whom tell cultural stories relating to the species and consider it bad luck to harm or injure the birds (Zdenek, pers comm., 2015). The palm cockatoo (Australian) occurs on the homeland (Ngaachi) of the Kuuku I'yu (northern Kaanju) indigenous peoples. The Kuuku I'yu people have important social, cultural, spiritual, historical and ecological connections to their homeland and they recognise the rich biodiversity it supports, including habitat for rare and threatened species such as this palm cockatoo (Kila) (Chuulangun Aboriginal Corporation, 2010).





Q13
Choose from the sentences below the one which fits each gap.

Click each sentence to select it then click the correct gap (A – F) below.

There is one extra sentence which you do not need to use.

Sentence 1. The researchers found palm cockatoos a difficult subject to study because they are very shy
Sentence 2. And this suggested that actually they ujse their drumming, along with a complex array of calls and wing-flapping, to attract female birds.
Sentence 3. The birds here are considered vulnerable because of aluminium ore mining in the area.
Sentence 4. This is an opportunity to show off beak strength and cleverness -- the birds are incredibly intelligent.
Sentence 5. The birds sway together and gently preen each other's features, an act of pair-bonding that helps them prepare for breeding.
Sentence 6. Occasionally he mixes in a whistle or other sounds from an impressive repertoire of around 20 syllables.
Sentence 7. Individual males differed significantly in percussive styles.