Read the four extracts below on the theme of colour.

Which extract...

In which extract does the writer...

explains how people perceive different colours?	A/B/C/D

describes someone becoming newly aware of colour?	A/B/C/D

refers to various meanings that one colour may convey?	A/B/C/D

explains why a change occurred in the composition of colouring materials?	A/B/C/D

mentions someone who was eager to use colour in an unconventional way?	A/B/C/D

describes how our mental processes are involved in interpreting colour?	A/B/C/D

says that the use of colour in one painting initially appeared to be wrong?	A/B/C/D

gives evidence of the early use of coloured paints for a particular purpose?	A/B/C/D


Extract A

The discovery of a 100,000-year-old 'paint workshop' in the Blombos Cave, in South Africa — complete with various ochres, bones, charcoal, grinding-stones, abalone shell containers and mixing vessels, but without any contemporaneous cave painting — suggests that the pigments were being used at that time for body painting and face painting, rather than cave art. The same is true of sacred sites in Australia, such as the Arnhem Land rock shelters, where used lumps of red ochre pigment were discovered, but no sign of any Aboriginal rock art. It therefore appears that by the time humans started to create the first prehistoric art, they would already have had some experience in sourcing, extracting and blending pigments for personal decoration. But many of the colours and hues used to dye bodies, faces and hair were made from animal and vegetable sources, which were only effective in the short-term. So artists gradually switched to mineral-based pigments derived from iron oxide, manganese and kaolin, which didn't fade.


Extract B

I had never seen a painting made from the beginning. I thought that you painted what you saw, using the colours you saw.

He taught me.

He began the painting of the baker's daughter with a layer of pale grey on the white canvas. Then he made reddish-brown marks all over it to indicate where the girl and the table and pitcher and window would go. After that I thought he would begin to paint what he saw — a girl's face, a blue skirt, a yellow and black bodice, a silver pitcher and basin. Instead he painted patches of colour — black where her skirt would be, ochre for the bodice, red for the pitcher and the basin it sat in. He spent a long time on these false colours, as I called them.

But then he began to add new colours on top of these. He painted a light blue over the girl's skirt, and it became a blue through which bits of black could be seen, darker in the shadow of the table, lighter closer to the window. The pitcher and basin were the most complicated — they became yellow, and brown, and green, and blue. They reflected the pattern of the rug, the girl's bodice, the blue cloth draped over the chair — everything but their true silver colour. And yet they looked as they should, like a pitcher and a basin.

After that I could not stop looking at things.


Extract C

The universe is pulsating with an energy that we call electromagnetic waves. The frequency range of electromagnetic waves is huge. But the average human eye can detect only a very small portion of this vast range — only, in fact, the portion with wavelengths between 0.00038 and 0.00075 millimetres. We know this section as visible light. When our eyes see the whole range of visible light together, they read it as 'white'. When some of the wavelengths are missing, they see it as 'coloured'.

So when we see 'red', what we are actually seeing is that portion of the electromagnetic spectrum with a wavelength of about 0.0007 millimetres, in a situation where the other wavelengths are absent. It is our brain (and our language) which informs us it is 'red', and at the same time may attach cultural labels that tell us it is powerful, or that it is the colour of love, or that it is a traffic sign which means we have to stop.


Extract D

Some Aboriginal artistic communities have chosen to stay with using traditional pigments from the earth — red ochre, yellow oxide, white pipeclay, and black charcoal. Other communities have moved on to a broader palette.

Colour choice is often arrived at through a group decision-making process in the community of Lajamanu. Lorna Fencer Napurrula was told by her peer group of artists that symbolic designs had to be painted in black and the dotting that went around the design had to be white. Lorna argued that she wasn't bound as an artist to continue to paint the symbols as they were used traditionally. A considerable argument went on between the Elders in the studio. This was eventually resolved and Lorna went on to use a broader colour palette in her paintings.
