Read the text below then answer the questions.

Six sentences have been removed from the text. Choose from the sentences (A – G) the one which fits each gap (12 – 17). There is one extra sentence which you do not need to use.

The History of Escalators

Today, escalators are a routine part of modern existence, moving people in large public buildings throughout the world. They're practical, user-friendly and relatively safe, but this present-day convenience has been a product of many false starts as well as some imaginative thinking.

The first person to design an escalator was the inventor Nathan Ames, in 1848. His patent for the 'Revolving Stairs' would allow people to 'ascend and descend from one level of a building to another, without exerting any muscular strength'. When Ames wrote this, he was thinking this apparatus would exist in private residences. 12 ............ As with the rest of his inventions, though, Ames never even tried to build this escalator; it did not progress beyond the point of the idea being registered.

13 ............ Lee Gray, an architecture professor at the University of North Carolina-Charlotte, says that even if someone had constructed a model of Ames' Revolving Stairs, it is doubtful it would have succeeded — there was no provision for hooking it to a motor. The next attempt at moving stairs came in 1889, when an amateur Philadelphia engineer named Leamon Souder earned a patent for 'The Stairway', a moving staircase that was pulled by an 'endless chain' which would be moved hydraulically. Like Ames, Souder never actually built his model. 14 ............ Souder described his invention in a manner that made it plausible using the new technologies of the day.

In 1896, Jesse Reno took the next step, at Coney Island, a fairground in New York. 15 ............ Examples included the roller-coaster and large-scale electric lighting. So it was a great place for Reno to get publicity for his 'Inclined Elevator'. Essentially a slow-moving single platform conveyor belt, the invention carried people up a short rise to Coney Island's Iron Pier, with moving handrails to ensure people could steady themselves as they moved upwards. 16 ............ But although it was so popular, it was not especially effective as a way of transporting people. Its electric motor only allowed it to go at a speed of 90 feet per minute, about 30 percent of an adult human's walking pace.

The explorer George Wheeler registered a patent for a similar idea around the same time as Reno, and his design featured actual steps like the escalators of today. Before the production stage, the patent was bought from Wheeler and the invention was named the 'escalator', based on the Latin word for steps: scala. Elisha Otis and his famed elevator company produced a working model for the 1900 Paris Exposition. Looking more like a modern escalator than Reno's version, the escalator came complete with steps and a track system. Professor Gray says the demonstration was a hit at the event, serving dual purposes. 17 ............

By 1911, Reno's company had installed more than 20 escalators in North America and, by 1920, Otis had installed 350 escalators across the world, mostly in department stores and mass transit systems. Some of these are still carrying customers up and down today.


Sentence A. The design might not have worked anyway.
Sentence B. Many people's first exposure to modern inventions happened here.
Sentence C. The machinery was designed to benefit those who could not climb stairs in their homes.
Sentence D. In just over a week as a test project, the invention garnered more than 75,000 riders.
Sentence E. As well as this, a special guard called a comb platform prevented clothes from getting caught.
Sentence F. Yet this was an innovation that was more sophisticated in its engineering.
Sentence G. Not only did it display the technology, it alleviated foot traffic.
