Using the tabs above (Extracts A – D), read the four extracts on the theme of the sea. Then answer the questions opposite.

 


Extract A

 

There's something about going for an ocean swim that makes your problems shrink. I have often entered the biting cold water feeling weighed down by concerns that I can't seem to shake. It never ceases to amaze me that when I come out they somehow seem to occupy less headspace. You look out at the vastness all around you and realise that you are a tiny speck in a huge, swirling ocean.

When I first started open water swimming, I spoke to an expert about getting over a fear of what might be in there with you. He said that it's a privilege to enter a space with wild creatures – just think how different our planet would be if they weren't there. While that may not be a comforting thought for everyone, it is for me.

Knowing your limits and being fully respectful of the ocean are paramount when you go swimming. I have turned back on occasion when the water looks too rough. You always have to remember this is not your habitat.

Using the tabs above (Extracts A – D), read the four extracts on the theme of the sea. Then answer the questions opposite.

 

Extract B

 

The Black Sea is the world’s biggest single reservoir of hydrogen sulphide, or H2S, one of the deadliest substances in the natural world. Below a fluctuating depth of between 150 and 200 metres, there is no life. The water is anoxic, without dissolved oxygen, and impregnated with H2S; because much of the Black Sea is deep, this means that some 90 per cent of its volume is sterile.

And yet, until the last hundred years, the Black Sea has seemed to human beings a place of almost monstrous abundance. The poisonous darkness lay far below, unknown to anyone. Above the hundred-fathom line, the ‘halocline’ or ‘oxycline’ which marks the upper limit of anoxia, the water boiled with life. Salmon and huge sturgeon – the beluga can reach the weight of a small whale – crowded up the big rivers to spawn. Caviar was so plentiful that it was once given to the poor.



Extract C

 

Between hurricane surf, rainy weather, and a cold, I’ve had some time on my hands to read. I picked up three surf books, naturally. My favourite, by far, was Surf’s Up: The Girl’s Guide to Surfing. Every night, for the past three weeks, my husband has found me in bed, nose in the book, memorising surfing vocabulary. He just laughs. You can’t learn to surf from a book, but you can learn a lot of things that will help make surfing easier, and make interacting with other surfers easier. For example, knowing what the terms rails, mushy, goofy, drop in, etc. mean not only makes you seem like you know more about what you are doing, it also makes you less likely to incur the wrath of surfers. (From my limited experience, surfers don’t really have wrath, unless you drop in on them during a really good wave.) Note – dropping in essentially means cutting off another surfer who has already started surfing a wave, effectively ending their ride. Not cool.


Extract D

 

I confess I hope never to experience a full Australian summer again. I blame my childhood. I grew up in the Clare Valley of South Australia, where the closest natural body of water was a mostly dry creek. For a week a year our family would decamp to a holiday house by the beach in Adelaide, where we would live a lie, pretending to be proper outdoor-loving, sun-baking Australians rather than the white-skinned, red-nosed Irish-descended bunch we really were. My six brothers and sisters and I would spend all day in our bathers, attempt and mostly fail to bodysurf, build sandcastles and sand traps, get furiously sunburned and spend the final part of the holiday lying inside on the cool lino floor, watching TV and peeling patches of dead skin off each other’s shoulders.





Which extract…

refers to a dangerous constituent of some seawater?	A/B/C/D

says that the power of the sea should not be underestimated?	A/B/C/D

suggests that newcomers are not always welcomed by veterans out on the water?	A/B/C/D

suggests that the sea can be a rich food resource?	A/B/C/D

explains the positive effect that the sea can have on one’s mental outlook?	A/B/C/D

reveals that the writer was out of place in a seaside environment?	A/B/C/D

mentions some words of wisdom about the sea which proved helpful to the writer?	 A/B/C/D

mentions some specific jargon connected to being in the sea? A/B/C/D
