Nhamo goes for firewood
 

Nhamo is a twelve-year-old girl who lives with her aunt and uncle in a remote village in East Africa.


Most girls were afraid to gather firewood by themselves. The village was surrounded by a forest where almost anything might hide. Nhamo was afraid, too, but she had a compelling reason to venture out alone. She didn't expect to meet elephants - although they migrated to the river at certain times of the year. She wasn't likely to run into a buffalo - although someone had done so a few months earlier.

Her most persistent worry was leopards. She feared leopards with a terror so complete that she couldn't breathe when she thought of them. Her mother had been killed by one when Nhamo was only three. Nhamo couldn't remember the tragedy, yet somewhere inside her was a memory of flowing, spotted skin and terrible claws.

Now she followed a broad path from the village to the stream. There was an area of yellow sand where she could see the bottom clearly. No crocodile could creep up on her here. She waded across. The water came up to her shoulders.

She always experienced a moment of panic in the middle because she couldn't swim, but she planted her feet firmly in the coarse sand and struggled on. When she got to the other side, she scrambled up a rock and picked off a leech that had managed to fasten onto her ankle.

The wetness of her dress-cloth against her skin was very pleasant, but she couldn't waste time enjoying it. Aunt Chipo would be waiting for her firewood. Even more important, Nhamo had to return before dusk.

Dusk was when the leopards came out to hunt.

She followed an old, overgrown trail for a long time until she came out into a clearing. A few poles remained of the village that had once been there, and a few pumpkin mounds with vegetables gone wild. Nhamo wasn't sure who had lived here. Her own people no longer visited the site. Some said the place was haunted.

With a nervous look at the shadows under the trees, Nhamo quickly gathered firewood. That was the good thing about this place: the wood was easy to find. It took her far less time than Aunt Chipo suspected. She tied the wood into a bundle and deposited it by the trail.

She climbed a hill at the edge of the deserted village.

Now came the moment she was waiting for. She dragged aside a slab of stone from a hole in the rock. Inside were the treasures Nhamo had managed to collect. She removed pots, wooden spoons, a drinking gourd, an old cloth Aunt Chipo once used to cover her hair, and a knife Uncle Kufa had hurled into a bush when the tip broke off. (He was even angrier when he couldn't find it again later.)

Reverently, Nhamo smoothed out the cloth and put the utensils on it. Last of all, she reached into a pot and removed - a roll of paper.

She weighted the edges down with stones. It was a picture torn out of a magazine.

Books were unheard of in Nhamo's village, but very occasionally a magazine found its way there. Only two men in the village could read. They retold the stories to everyone’s enjoyment. The women studied the pictures of clothes and houses, gardens and cars with great interest. They tried to copy the hairstyles in the photographs. Eventually, the magazines fell apart and were used to light fires.

This picture had been on the cover, so it was of sturdier paper. The minute Nhamo had seen it, her heart beat so fast it hurt. The picture showed a beautiful woman with braided hair decorated with beads. She wore a flowered dress and a white, white apron. She was cutting a slice of white, white bread, and next to her was a block of yellow margarine.

The room behind the woman was full of wonderful things, but what interested Nhamo most was the little girl. She was wearing a blue dress, and her hair was gathered into two fat puffs over her ears. The woman smiled at her in the kindest way, and Nhamo knew the white bread and yellow margarine were meant for the little girl.

She thought the woman looked like Mother.

She couldn't remember Mother, and of course no one had a picture of her, but the way her spirit leapt when she saw that picture told her this was how Mother had looked.

Nhamo hadn't waited for the magazine to get old. Right away, when Aunt Chipo wasn't looking, she'd torn off the cover and hidden it. Aunt Chipo was terribly cross. She accused her sister of doing it, but it never crossed her mind that Nhamo was responsible.

Nhamo pretended to pour tea into the pots. She cut bread and covered it with margarine. ‘I climbed the mukuyu tree and got so many figs, Mai,’ she said. 'But they were full of worms. Then I saw a yellow bird – the kind that builds a basket over the water – and it ate the worms. Do you think they grow inside?’

Nhamo paused to let Mother answer.

Nhamo suddenly realized the light was going. Maiwee! She had been so absorbed, she had forgotten the time. Scrambling, she packed everything and dragged the lid over the hole. She slid down the hill and tied the firewood to her back.

In this light, the trail was almost invisible! The air was a strange, silvery colour. It was the moment when the day animals passed the night animals on their way to hunt. Leopards.

Q1
When the writer mentions elephants and buffalo, she is making the point that


they could possibly be a threat to Nhamo.


Nhamo does not believe stories she has heard about them.


the villagers are unaware of the danger in the forest.


a girl on her own is more likely to be attacked by them.


Q2 
When she crosses the stream, Nhamo is most worried by


the uneven river bed.


the presence of leeches.


the deep water.


the risk of crocodiles.

Q3
One advantage of the deserted village for Nhamo is that


it is near to the river.


no one else knows about it.


she can find vegetables there.


she can collect wood without any trouble.


Q4
The word ‘reverently’ tells us


that Nhamo believes the possessions have supernatural powers.


how precious the articles hidden in the hole are to Nhamo. 


that Nhamo is careful in the way she handles the possessions of others. 


how valuable some everyday articles are in Nhamo’s village. 

Q5
When the writer tells us about how magazines were used in Nhamo’s village, we learn that


most people are only interested in the pictures.


they are a window to the world outside the village.


most people laugh at the stories they contain.


they are more valued as fuel than as reading matter.

Q6
The main reason why Nhamo is attracted to the magazine photograph is that


it is the only picture she has of her mother.


it includes a child who looks just like her. 


it shows a loving relationship.


it suggests a luxurious lifestyle. 